---
layout: post
title:      "Flatiron: A long journey comes to an end, a new one begins?"
date:       2021-05-25 01:37:36 -0400
permalink:  flatiron_a_long_journey_comes_to_an_end_a_new_one_begins
---

As I sit back and reflect on my very long journey at Flatiron, noting that what should have taken me less than a year to complete took me three years, I'm still satisfied with myself that I finally finished. Unfortunately, a lot of what I learned in the first few projects, after diving deep into Javascript and ReactJS have made Rails feel like a distant memory. This is the downside to having taken too long to complete my projects. My coach no longer works at Flatiron, that's how long it's been. Lots of technical coaches have left, Flatiron has been bought out. A lot has happened in these three years.

This post will be a rambling of self reflection of my journey and my career, as well as my time at Flatiron.

I had originally signed up for the bootcamp while I was unemployed, thinking I would have the time to complete it easy peasy, but soon afer completing the first project, I started a new job that was fairly time intensive and mentally demanding. I was trying to learn UVC and hardware verification test benches during the day. Learning Flatiron material in the late evening basically meant I could only work on it for an hour or so as my brain had already been quite exhausted from the day's activities. The material and labs were easy to work through in the sense that when I finished, I finished, and I was onto the next lesson. I loved the immediate feedback everytime a red circle would turn into a green circle. I made constant progress whenever I reached the training material.

The projects were what took me way longer than I had expected or planned for. I was told every student does this, and I was no different. I was always dreaming big dreams and had to scale back a lot to make it more reasonable. One thing I have always failed at was underestimating the time it takes to finish a task/feature. I did this at work in regards to myself, I see this with people who are supposed to plan big projects to lead a team fail to account for roadblocks, and when it came to planning out a project, I failed to do the same. (A really great project manager is worth their salary, I'll tell you that!)

Authentication was my nemesis the entire course, as was platform issues getting things setup in my Windows environment. Things that deflate me, I tend to take a break on. This delayed my progress, due to taking breaks often due to that frustration. I have learned I need to be better at this and just struggle through my discomfort.

One thing that Flatiron did was brought joy in web programming back to me. Long ago I had designed a ton of webpages, from high school through college, when designing a webpage simply meant HTML and CSS, creating your own images and maybe, if you're adventurous, very basic Javascript (which was extremely difficult to debug back in the day). I had dabbled in SQL and PHP on my own and also my job was to maintain a few webpages using ASP and HTML while I was a student in college. I was probably too early in my love of web programming.

After I graduated, there were no jobs in web programming or web design in my San Diego (I am not sure when the word "full stack" and "front-end/back-end" became a thing, probably years!). I eventually found a job as an intern in Application Engineering, which consisted of no programming, and then to Integration testing within the same company. After that, I moved to another company working in firmware (C language). I made the profound mistake to not continue learning new technologies and creating new webpages in my spare time and though not wrong, decided to focus on work life balance which allowed me to work on other hobbies I enjoyed that weren't technical. 

San Diego tends to be a hardware centric town. Maybe with Amazon, Google, Apple moving into this area, full stack jobs will become more plentiful. But during the time when I was working, my web programming skills languished. My graphic skills, languished. The industry zoomed past me while I still held archaic skills in the web space. 

Being in this industry is extremely frustrating, more so as the years go by. One learns they will NEVER learn enough. I will NEVER be the expert of anything I learn. There is also, always something new to learn, a new language, a new framework. I have no idea how people have any confidence in this industry unless they are a genius. Sometimes I wonder if Rails/JS/React is enough alone to find a job. It would also be good to know how to use Docker, have a good idea about UX, learn how to create a mobile application, store things in the cloud - the list is honestly endless. In addition, one needs to learn a new specialized skill - interview whiteboarding/various algorithms - something we never needed 13 years ago. For someone who grew up believing they were never good enough at anything they did, it is a hard realization that I will continue to never be good enough to live up to my own expectations, but I hope that it will be good enough to find a job doing something I enjoy. Flatiron has made me feel slightly more "up to speed" in what is current in the industry, but at the same time, I already feel like I'm behind, given how quickly the industry moves. 

This may all sound like a complaint, but I have really enjoyed my time here. I believe in lifetime learning, and this experience at Flatiron has taught me an important lesson - learning things take time. I will not be able to learn something overnight and without hard work. There is no such thing as a shortcut. My personality lends itself to constantly wanting to learn "all the things" so that I start panicking when I feel I'm not learning fast enough, whatever the topic may be (and I have a lot of interests). This was a really great reminder that slow and steady wins the race, instead of fitting it all into a handful of months of learning (which is what I did with the last two projects which really hurt!) I could have spent the last 13 years slowly learning instead of expecting myself to know everything overnight and I could have done a better job balancing my time in the last few years instead of cramming it in all into various late nights the last few months. Constantly learning is so valuable, and so is struggling. Struggling with the material gave me opportunities to really understand my problems and know the language even better. I need to learn to live with that discomfort and recognize that is where the true gains lie, not with things I perceive to be easy.

I still have imposter syndrome. I know I will never be able to get past it, but I also know I can only do what I know to make me feel a little less inept -- tackle the difficult challenges thrown at me --- and never. stop. learning. Doing so will make me a more valuable worker and chip away the feeling that I don't deserve to be in this industry, that people know way more than me, and the constant wonder I have as to why anyone would want to hire me. I'll never shake that feeling, but armed with more knowledge, the more I feel I'm not constantly at a loss.

Most importantly, with all the projects I'd like to do, I now have a great foundation of how to start those projects when I really had no clue how to do it before! I'm so excited to continue on my learning journey and look forward to improving all my previous projects. Knowing that I can learn anything if I put my mind to it, with a lot of sweat and perseverance, gives me the confidence I need to move forward from this terrific course. I particularly enjoyed all the study groups which, besides the labs, were not only really helpful with issues, but also in life lessons and created a real sense of community, which is something I have rarely felt in the last 15 years of my career. However my career ends up, I am thankful for this experience and the newfound skills I have acquired and will look back to this period of my life with pride.

